>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SUNDAY, APRIL 10:
INVESTIGATORS REVEAL: THE
TERRORISTS WHO ATTACKED BRUSSELS
LAST MONTH ORIGINALLY INTENDED
TO STRIKE PARIS.
IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT, A NEW
PATH IN TEXAS TO APPEAL
CONVICTIONS BASED ON FLAWED
SCIENTIFIC EVIDENCE.
>> JUNK SCIENCE HAS PROVEN WE
HAVE NUMEROUS PEOPLE, MAYBE
LARGE NUMBERS NATIONWIDE,
WRONGFULLY CONVICTED.
>> Sreenivasan: AND, WATCHING"
THE WIRE" IN THE CLASSROOM.
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS AT
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
BELGIUM ANNOUNCED TODAY: ISIS
TERRORISTS HURRIED TO CARRY OUT
SUICIDE BOMBINGS ON THE AIRPORT
AND A TRAIN STATION IN BRUSSELS
AND HAD ORIGINALLY INTENDED TO
ATTACK PARIS, AGAIN.
WITHOUT PROVIDING PLOT DETAILS,
BELGIAN PROSECUTORS SAID"
NUMEROUS ELEMENTS IN THE
INVESTIGATION HAVE SHOWN THAT
THE TERRORIST GROUP INITIALLY
HAD THE INTENTION TO STRIKE IN
FRANCE AGAIN.
EVENTUALLY, SURPRISED BY THE
SPEED OF THE PROGRESS IN THE
ONGOING INVESTIGATION, THEY
URGENTLY TOOK THE DECISION TO
STRIKE IN BRUSSELS."
THE BRUSSELS ATTACKS KILLED 32
PEOPLE ON MARCH 22 AND CAME FOUR
DAYS AFTER THE ARREST IN
BRUSSELS OF SALAH ABDESLAM, THE
PRIME SUSPECT IN THE NOVEMBER
ATTACKS IN PARIS, WHICH KILLED
130 PEOPLE IN CAFES AND A
CONCERT HALL.
BELGIAN POLICE DETAINED FOUR
MORE MEN THIS WEEKEND FOR THE
BRUSSELS ATTACKS, INCLUDING
MOHAMED ABRINI, WHO THEY SAY,
HAS ADMITTED BEING "THE MAN IN
THE HAT" ALONGSIDE TWO BOMBERS
IN BRUSSELS AIRPORT SECURITY
VIDEO.
HE'S ALSO CHARGED IN CONNECTION
WITH THE PARIS ATTACKS IN
NOVEMBER.
IN INDIA, A CELEBRATION OF THE
HINDU NEW YEAR TURNED TRAGIC
TODAY.
A FIREWORKS DISPLAY SPARKED A
FIRE AND EXPLOSIONS OVERNIGHT
INSIDE A PACKED TEMPLE COMPLEX
IN THE SOUTHERN STATE OF KERALA.
MOST OF THE 102 PEOPLE WHO DIED
WERE KILLED WHEN A BUILDING
STORING FIREWORKS COLLAPSED.
INDIAN PRIME MINISTER NARENDRA
MODI VISITED THE SITE AND MET
WITH SURVIVORS AT A HOSPITAL
WHERE SOME OF THE 400 INJURED
WERE BEING TREATED.
GREECE IS CONDEMNING MACEDONIA'S
USE OF FORCE TODAY AGAINST
MIGRANTS AND REFUGEES STRANDED
BY BORDER CLOSURES THROUGHOUT
EUROPE.
MACEDONIAN SOLDIERS FIRED TEAR
GAS TO STOP MIGRANTS FROM
SCALING THE FENCE SEPARATING THE
TWO COUNTRIES.
DOCTORS WITHOUT BORDERS SAID IT
TREATED 300 PEOPLE FOR TEAR GAS
AND INJURIES.
MORE THAN 11,000 MIGRANTS,
HOPING TO PASS THROUGH TO
WESTERN EUROPE, ARE CAMPED AT
THAT BORDER INSIDE GREECE.
THE PRESIDENTIAL CAMPAIGN
CALENDAR IS NOW CLEAR UNTIL NEW
YORK'S DELEGATE-RICH PRIMARY ON
APRIL 19.
TEXAS SENATOR TED CRUZ SWEPT ALL
34 OF COLORADO'S DELEGATES AT
YESTERDAY'S REPUBLICAN STATE
CONVENTION AND FRIDAY'S
CAUCUSES, BUT HE STILL TRAILS
BUSINESSMAN DONALD TRUMP BY 226
DELEGATES IN THE RACE TO THE
1,237 NEEDED TO WIN HIS PARTY'S
NOMINATION.
VERMONT SENATOR BERNIE SANDERS
WON THE WYOMING CAUCUSES
YESTERDAY BUT SPLIT THE 14
DELEGATES THERE WITH HILLARY
CLINTON.
SANDERS HAS NARROWED HER LEAD IN
PLEDGED DELEGATES-- THOSE
AWARDED BY WINNING VOTES IN
PRIMARIES AND CAUCUSES-- TO 219.
BUT CLINTON HAS AN ADVANTAGE OF
438 SUPERDELEGATES-- PARTY
OFFICIALS WHO GET A SEAT AT THE
NATIONAL CONVENTION-- PUTTING
HER AHEAD BY MORE THAN 650
DELEGATES OVERALL.
LOOKING TO HIS REMAINING NINE
MONTHS IN OFFICE, PRESIDENT
OBAMA TOLD FOX NEWS TODAY HE
HOPES TO FIND COMMON GROUND WITH
REPUBLICANS IN CONGRESS.
>> OUR SYSTEM IS DESIGNED TO
WORK IF PEOPLE WHO DISAGREE CAN
LISTEN TO EACH OTHER, IF WE
TREAT EACH OTHER FAIRLY IN TERMS
OF THE PROCESS, IF WE RECOGNIZE
THAT COMPROMISE IS NOT A DIRTY
WORD.
>> Sreenivasan: THE PRESIDENT
ALSO SAID HE BELIEVES MRS.
CLINTON DID NOT JEOPARDIZE
NATIONAL SECURITY BY USING HER
PRIVATE EMAIL SERVER WHILE
SERVING AS HIS SECRETARY OF
STATE.
>> Sreenivasan: A VIRGINIA MAN
WHO SPENT 33 YEARS IN PRISON FOR
MURDER AND RAPE WAS EXONERATED
AND RELEASED FRIDAY, WITH
PROSECUTORS SAYING THE
SCIENTIFIC EVIDENCE USED TO
CONVICT HIM WOULD NOT RESULT IN
A GUILTY VERDICT TODAY.
DEFENSE ATTORNEYS HAD ARGUED
EXPERTS WERE WRONG TO MATCH BITE
MARKS ON THE RAPE VICTIM'S LEGS
TO THE DEFENDANT AND THAT BITE
MARKS ARE TOO UNRELIABLE TO USE
IN COURT.
THIS ARGUMENT UNDERSCORES A NEW
LAW IN TEXAS, THE NATION'S
FIRST, TO ASSIST PRISONERS IN
APPEALING CONVICTIONS BASED ON
UNSOUND SCIENTIFIC EVIDENCE,
SOMETIMES CALLED "JUNK SCIENCE."
IN TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT ALISON
STEWART WENT TO TEXAS TO SEE HOW
THAT LAW IS WORKING.
>> I GREW UP WITH HIM FROM A
BABY.
AND I ADORED HIM.
HE WAS KIND OF ECCENTRIC.
HE HAD HIS FLAWS.
BUT, OH MY GOD, HE WAS A GOOD
MAN.
>> Reporter: SONIA CACY IS
DESCRIBING HER UNCLE, BILL
RICHARDSON.
IN THE EARLY 1990S, CACY LIVED
IN FORT STOCKTON, TEXAS WITH HER
UNCLE, WHO WAS IN HIS SEVENTIES
AND SUFFERING FROM A FORM OF
DEMENTIA.
ON THE MORNING OF NOVEMBER 10TH,
1991, EVERYTHING CHANGED.
>> THE NIGHT BEFORE WE WATCHED A
MOVIE TOGETHER.
BURT LANCASTER WAS IN IT, AND
THAT WAS MY FAVORITE.
AND THEN WHEN THAT WAS OVER, IT
WAS A LATE MOVIE, I WENT TO BED,
AND WE WERE BOTH ALIVE.
>> Reporter: AROUND DAWN, A FIRE
BROKE OUT IN THEIR HOME.
THE THEN 44 YEAR OLD CACY
ESCAPED THROUGH A WINDOW AND RAN
TO A NEIGHBOR, WHO CALLED 911.
WHEN EMERGENCY RESPONDERS FOUND
RICHARDSON, THE 76-YEAR-OLD MAN
WAS DEAD.
AUTHORITIES SAID THE FIRE WAS
SUSPICIOUS.
WHEN DID YOU SENSE, SONIA, THAT
THE AUTHORITIES SUSPECTED YOU OF
SETTING THE FIRE?
>> WELL, THEY TOOK ME TO THE
HOSPITAL.
I WAS THERE EIGHT DAYS FOR SMOKE
INHALATION.
SCRAPED ALL MY FINGERNAILS.
I SAID, "WHAT'S THE MATTER? WHAT
ARE YOU LOOKING FOR?" AND I WAS
STILL CRYING OVER UNCLE BILL.
AND HE SAID, "BLOOD OR
WHATEVER'S ON YOU."
>> Reporter: FIVE MONTHS LATER,
CACY WAS ARRESTED AND CHARGED
WITH MURDER BY ARSON.
DID YOU HAVE ANYTHING TO DO WITH
THE FIRE THAT OCCURRED ON
NOVEMBER 10, 1991?
>> NO.
I DID NOT.
I DID NOT EVER, ANYTHING.
NO.
>> Reporter: GARY UDASHEN IS
CACY'S ATTORNEY.
>> THEY CLAIMED THAT SHE HAD
DOUSED HER UNCLE BILL, IN
GASOLINE AND SET HIM ON FIRE,
WHICH KILLED HIM AND THEN BURNED
THE HOUSE DOWN.
>> Reporter: AT THE TRIAL, THE
MOST CRITICAL PIECE OF
INFORMATION CAME FROM A REPORT
BY A TOXICOLOGIST, SOMEONE
TRAINED TO CHECK FOR DRUGS AND
CHEMICALS IN THE BODY.
HE TESTIFIED THAT ACCELERANT WAS
FOUND ON RICHARDSON'S CLOTHING.
THE PROSECUTION'S FIRE
INVESTIGATOR ALSO TESTIFIED THAT
BURN PATTERNS IN THE HOUSE WERE
INDICATIVE OF AN ACCELERANT.
>> SONIA IS A REAL, LIVE EXAMPLE
OF SOMEBODY WHOSE LIFE WAS
REALLY DESTROYED BASED UPON BAD
SCIENTIFIC TESTIMONY IN COURT.
>> Reporter: IN 1993, CACY, A
WIFE AND MOTHER OF THREE GROWN
CHILDREN, WAS CONVICTED IN A
JURY TRIAL AND LATER SENTENCED
TO 99 YEARS IN PRISON.
BUT A RELATIVELY NEW TEXAS LAW
COULD CHANGE CACY'S LIFE.
IT'S KNOWN AS THE "JUNK SCIENCE
LAW."
THE LAW OFFERS A DIRECT PATH TO
APPEAL WHEN THERE IS SCIENTIFIC
EVIDENCE THAT WAS NOT AVAILABLE
AT THE TIME OF THE CONVICTION OR
THERE IS NEW EVIDENCE THAT
CONTRADICTS WHAT WAS USED TO
CONVICT.
BEFORE THE LAW, IT WAS
IMPOSSIBLE IN TEXAS TO APPEAL A
CONVICTION BASED ONLY ON FLAWED
SCIENTIFIC EVIDENCE.
WHEN THE INNOCENCE PROJECT OF
TEXAS TOOK CACY'S APPEAL,
ATTORNEYS IMMEDIATELY QUESTIONED
THE TOXICOLOGIST'S RESULTS,
SPECIFICALLY A CHROMATOGRAPHY
TEST, WHICH SEPARATES MIXTURES
FOUND AT CRIME SCENES TO DETECT
MOLECULES LIKE THOSE FROM
GASOLINE.
>> WE ACTUALLY HAD THE TEXAS
STATE FIRE MARSHAL, WHO'S A
STATE OF TEXAS OFFICIAL, ISSUE
HIS REPORT WHERE HE SAID THE
CAUSE OF THE FIRE SHOULD BE
LISTED AS A "UNDETERMINED."
AND WHAT HE MEANT BY THAT, THAT
THERE WAS NO GASOLINE ON THE
CLOTHING.
SO YOU COULDN'T SAY THAT IT WAS
ARSON.
DR. BUC IS THE EXPERT THAT THE
DISTRICT ATTORNEY HIRED.
>> Reporter: WHICH BACKFIRED.
>> WHICH BACKFIRED, BECAUSE DR.
BUC SAID THAT THE CHROMATOGRAMS
ARE "NEGATIVE FOR GASOLINE,"
WHICH IS EXACTLY WHAT ALL OF OUR
OTHER EXPERTS SAID.
> Reporter: SEVEN OTHER ARSON
EXPERTS BROUGHT IN BY THE
DEFENSE AGREED, AND TWO DEFENSE
PATHOLOGISTS WHO REVIEWED
RICHARDSON'S AUTOPSY FOUND HE
DIED OF A HEART ATTACK, NOT
BURNS.
>> WHAT EVERYBODY THINKS MOST
LIKELY HAPPENED IS THAT UNCLE
BILL WAS A VERY CARELESS SMOKER.
HE ACCIDENTALLY SET THE HOUSE ON
FIRE, AND HE ACTUALLY DIED OF A
HEART ATTACK.
>> Reporter: THIS NEW
INTERPRETATION OF THE EVIDENCE
CONVINCED THE TEXAS BOARD OF
PARDONS AND PAROLE TO GRANT CACY
PAROLE, AFTER SHE HAD SPENT FIVE
YEARS IN PRISON.
BUT WITHOUT HER CONVICTION
OVERTURNED, AT 68, CACY HAS BEEN
REQUIRED TO REPORT TO A PAROLE
OFFICER ONCE A MONTH FOR THE
PAST 17 YEARS.
>> Reporter: WHAT KIND OF BURDEN
HAS IT BEEN TO BE CONSIDERED IN
THE EYES OF THE LAW A CONVICTED
MURDERER?
WHAT HAS THE BURDEN OF THAT
BEEN?
>> IT'S A BIG BURDEN, BECAUSE
YOU CAN'T EVEN GET A PLACE TO
LIVE.
EVERYBODY DOES YOUR BACKGROUND.
WHERE YOU'RE LIVING, WHERE
YOU'RE GOING TO WORK.
I'VE NEVER BEEN ABLE TO GET A
PLACE TO LIVE.
YOU KNOW, A REGULAR PLACE.
>> Reporter: TODAY, CACY LIVES
IN SOUTHEAST TEXAS AND SPENDS
TIME WITH HER FAMILY AND
FRIENDS.
BUT HER STANDING MURDER
CONVICTION MAKES IT DIFFICULT TO
FIND A JOB BECAUSE OF BACKGROUND
CHECKS.
SHE'S GOTTEN BY WORKING FOR
FRIENDS AND PET SITTING.
CACY HOPES THE JUNK SCIENCE LAW
WILL BRING HER A STEP CLOSER TO
REAL FREEDOM.
>> IT'S DEFINITELY A LAW-AND-
ORDER STATE, BUT WE'VE GOTTEN
SMART.
>> Reporter: DEMOCRATIC STATE
SENATOR JOHN WHITMIRE, WHO
CHAIRS THE TEXAS SENATE CRIMINAL
JUSTICE COMMITTEE, SPONSORED THE
JUNK SCIENCE BILL.
HE SAYS HIS STATE'S RECKONING
WITH D.N.A. TESTING PAVED THE
WAY FOR THE LAW.
SINCE 1993, TEXAS HAS EXONERATED
57 PEOPLE, MOSTLY CONVICTED OF
MURDER AND SEXUAL ASSAULT, WHO
APPEALED WITH D.N.A. EVIDENCE.
THE HIGHEST NUMBER OF ANY STATE.
WHITMIRE SAYS THAT WAS A MORAL
WAKE UP CALL.
>> I HOPE IT KEEPS EVERYBODY UP
AT NIGHT IF THEY THINK ONE
PERSON IS WRONGFULLY CONVICTED.
JUNK SCIENCE HAS PROVEN WE HAVE
NUMEROUS PEOPLE, MAYBE LARGE
NUMBERS NATIONWIDE, WRONGFULLY
CONVICTED.
>> Reporter: WHEN TEXAS ADOPTED
ITS JUNK SCIENCE LAW IN 2013, IT
WAS THE FIRST IN THE NATION.
LAST YEAR, CALIFORNIA, BECAME
THE SECOND.
JUNK SCIENCE APPEALS ARE FINALLY
MAKING IT ONTO COURT CALENDARS
IN TEXAS, BUT THERE IS NO
DEADLINE FOR DECISIONS.
>> Reporter: SO FAR, ONLY ONE
CASE HAS RESULTED IN A NEW
TRIAL.
A HANDFUL OF OTHER CASES,
INCLUDING SONIA CACY'S ARE
WAITING TO BE HEARD.
>> Reporter: BUT THE NUMBER IS
EXPECTED TO INCREASE, BECAUSE OF
THE WORK OF THE TEXAS FORENSIC
SCIENCE COMMISSION, A GROUP OF
SEVEN SCIENTISTS AND TWO
ATTORNEYS APPOINTED BY THE
GOVERNOR.
THEY INVESTIGATE THE INTEGRITY
OF FORENSIC ANALYSIS AT CRIME
LABS AND SET GUIDELINES ABOUT
WHAT IS SOLID FORENSIC SCIENCE
FOR JUDGES, WHO ULTIMATELY
DECIDE WHAT EVIDENCE A JURY
SEES.
IN FEBRUARY, THE COMMISSION
RECOMMENDED THAT BITE MARK
EVIDENCE SHOULD STAY OUT OF
COURTROOMS, BECAUSE THERE IS NOT
ENOUGH SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH TO
PROVE ITS VALIDITY WHEN
IDENTIFYING A PERPETRATOR.
THE COMMISSION IS ALSO REVIEWING
OTHER TYPES OF EVIDENCE, LIKE
MICROSCOPIC HAIR ANALYSIS, THAT
INVOLVES COMPARING UNDER A
MICROSCOPE A LOOSE HAIR FROM A
CRIME SCENE TO HAIR FROM A
SUSPECT.
CASES THAT USE THE JUNK SCIENCE
LAW HOPE TO END UP HERE AT THE
TEXAS COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEALS.
IT IS THE BODY THAT CAN OVERTURN
A CONVICTION.
BUT AN OVERTURNED CONVICTION IS
NOT AN EXONERATION.
IT'S AN IMPORTANT DISTINCTION,
AND IT'S WHERE SOME SAY THIS LAW
FALLS SHORT.
CRIMINAL DEFENSE ATTORNEY JEFF
BLACKBURN PUSHED FOR THE LAW.
HE PREVIOUSLY WORKED FOR THE
INNOCENCE PROJECT OF TEXAS AND
TODAY HAS HIS OWN PRACTICE.
>> ARE YOU GOING TO GET
EXONERATED?
PROBABLY NOT.
THAT MEANS YOU'RE NOT GOING TO
BE COMPENSATED.
THAT MEANS YOU'RE NEVER GOING TO
REALLY HAVE YOUR NAME CLEARED.
YOU'RE NEVER REALLY GOING TO GET
THE MORAL OR PRACTICAL
SATISFACTION OF SAYING, "I
DIDN'T DO IT AND THE COURTS HAVE
EXONERATED ME."
AND THAT'S AN AWFUL BIG DEAL.
>> Reporter: FOR INSTANCE, IN
THAT FIRST CASE WHERE THE
CONVICTION WAS OVERTURNED DUE TO
DOUBTS RAISED ABOUT JUNK
SCIENCE, THE DEFENDANT WAS NOT
EXONERATED OR DECLARED ACTUALLY
INNOCENT.
WHICH REQUIRES A HIGHER STANDARD
OF EVIDENCE.
BLACKBURN SAYS ONE OF THE LAW'S
SHORTCOMINGS IS THERE IS NO
ACCOUNTABILITY FOR MISTAKES.
>> THE WORST THING UNDER THIS
LAW IS THAT NOW PROSECUTORS GET
OFF EASY.
THEY HAVE AN EXCUSE AND THEY CAN
SAY, "WELL, I GUESS IT WAS JUST
THOSE CREEPS IN THE LAB COATS
THAT DID IT TO US THIS TIME.
SORRY."
THAT PREVENTS US FROM EVER
UNDERSTANDING WHAT REALLY GOES
ON IN THESE CASES.
>> Reporter: SENATOR WHITMIRE
POINTS OUT THAT IT TOOK THE
STATE LEGISLATURE THREE SESSIONS
TO PASS THE BILL.
WE TALKED TO A COUPLE OF
ATTORNEYS WHO FELT THAT THE LAW
DIDN'T GO FAR ENOUGH, BECAUSE
THERE WASN'T AN EXONERATION
CLAUSE IN THAT.
>> YOU PROBABLY COULDN'T PASS
THAT.
>> IN MY WORK, IN CRIMINAL
JUSTICE IN TEXAS, I TAKE THREE
STEPS FORWARD, AND THEY PULL ME
BACK TWO. SO AT THE END OF THE
DAY OR END OF SESSION, I'VE
TAKEN A STEP.
>> Reporter: THE CURRENT
DISTRICT ATTORNEY OF THE COUNTY
WHERE CACY WAS TRIED STANDS BY
HER CONVICTION, REJECTS HER
ARGUMENTS ABOUT THE SCIENTIFIC
EVIDENCE, AND SAYS THERE IS
CONSIDERABLE CIRCUMSTANTIAL
EVIDENCE THAT STILL POINTS TO
HER GUILT.
WHAT ARE YOU GOING TO DO IF
SONIA PREVAILS UNDER THE JUNK
SCIENCE AVENUE, BUT IS NOT
EXONERATED?
>> I JUST DON'T SEE THAT
HAPPENING.
>> Reporter: ARE YOU SURE YOU'RE
GIVING HER FALSE HOPE?
>> NO.
>> Reporter: YOU FEEL THAT
CONFIDENT?
>> I FEEL THAT CONFIDENT THAT
SHE'S GOING TO BE EXONERATED.
>> Reporter: CACY THINKS OFTEN
OF HER UNCLE BILL WHILE WAITING
FOR HER NEW DAY IN COURT.
>> MY HOPES FOR THE FUTURE ARE
TO GET EVERYTHING LIKE THIS OVER
WITH, AND TO BE EXONERATED
BEFORE I DIE.
AND IT WOULD BE REALLY NICE FOR
MY CHILDREN.
>> Sreenivasan: SEE EXAMPLES OF
HOW CONTROVERSIAL SCIENCE HAS
LED TO CONVICTIONS.
WATCH OUR VIDEO ONLINE AT
facebook.com/newshour.
>> Sreenivasan: LOOKING BEYOND
THE LEAD-TAINTED DRINKING WATER
CRISIS IN THE CITY OF FLINT,
MICHIGAN, AN ASSOCIATED PRESS
INVESTIGATION OF ENVIRONMENTAL
PROTECTION AGENCY RECORDS HAS
FOUND: NEARLY 1,400 WATER
SYSTEMS PROVIDING TAP WATER TO
NEARLY FOUR MILLION AMERICANS
EXCEEDED THE ACCEPTABLE LEAD
LEVEL AT LEAST ONCE BETWEEN 2013
AND 2015.
A.P. REPORTER MEGHAN HOYER CO-
WROTE THE STORY, "TAINTED AT THE
TAP," AND JOINS ME NOW FROM
WASHINGTON, D.C.
HOW WIDE-RANGING IS
THIS?
IS THIS EVERY PART OF THE
COUNTRY GEE GRAPHICALLY, SIZE OF
CITIES, BIG AND SMALL?
>> IT IS.
WHAT WE FOUND WERE, WE LOOKED AT
ROUGHLY 77,000 WATER SYSTEMS
ACROSS THE U.S
AND WHAT WE FOUND WAS YOU KNOW,
THE ONES THAT HAD LEAD LEVELS
HIGHER THAN THE FEDERAL STANDARD
RANGED, THEY WERE IN ALMOST
EVERY STATE, AND THEY RANGED
FROM VERY SMALL SYSTEMS WITH 20
OR 25 CUSTOMERS TO VERY LARGE
SYSTEMS.
WE SAW CITIES AND COUNTIES THAT
SERVED HUNDREDS OF THOUSANDS OF
PEOPLE THAT HAD REPEATEDLY BEEN
OVER THE LIMIT.
>> Sreenivasan: AND YOU ALSO
POINT TO THE FACT THAT THE
NOTIFICATIONS WERE DIFFERENT
FROM TOWN TO TOWN AND HOW PEOPLE
FELT LIKE WHETHER THEY REALLY
KNEW THAT THERE WAS A DANGER OR
NOT, DIFFERED.
>> SO WHEN A SYSTEM IS OVER THE
FEDERAL LEAD LIMIT, IT HAS 60
DAYS TO PUT OUT A NOTIFICATION
TO ITS CUSTOMERS TELLING THEM
THERE HAS BEEN LEAD FOUND IN THE
WATER.
WHAT WE FOUND WERE THOSE
NOTIFICATIONS WERE OFTEN WRITTEN
IN A WAY THAT WAS CONFUSING TO
CUSTOMERS, WHERE CUSTOMERS
DIDN'T UNDERSTAND SEVERITY OF
THE PROBLEMS.
THEY WERE TOLD TO RUN THEIR
WATER FOR 30 SECONDS TO TWO
MINUTES AND THAT WOULD FLUSH A
LOT OF THE LEAD OUT OF THE
WATER.
THEY WERE TOLD THAT THE SYSTEMS
WERE AWARE OF THE PROBLEM AND
WERE WORKING FORWARD IT BUT A
LOT OF THESE SYSTEMS HAD HAD
PROBLEMS FOR YEARS AND YEARS.
>> THE RECENT STORY FOCUSED IN
ON GALASBERG, ILLINOIS.
ONE OF THE THINGS YOU HIGHLIGHT
IS THERE SEEMS TO BE A GAP
BETWEEN WHEN THE EPA COMING UP
WITH THE TESTS AND
COUNTER-- COUNTY LEADERSHIP AND
WHAT THEY CAN DO ABOUT IT.
>> THERE WAS A REAL DISCONNECT
FROM WHAT WE FOUND IN THE WATER
SYSTEMS VERSUS WHAT HEALTH
DEPARTMENTS WERE LOOKING AT.
BASICALLY THEY'RE FOCUSING ON
THINGS LIKE LEAD PAINT IN HOMES
AND LEAD IN TOYS.
BUT THEY'RE NOT EVEN LOOKING AT
THE WATER SYSTEM, OFTENTIMES AS
A SOURCE OF SOME OF THESE
PROBLEMS.
AND THERE'S BEEN MORE OF A PUSH
NOW NATIONALLY TO GET WATER
SYSTEMS AND HEALTH OFFICIALS
WORKING MORE IN COMFORT ON THESE
KINDS OF ISSUES.
>> Sreenivasan: GIVEN THAT THE
ABSOLUTE SOLUTION IS TO GO AHEAD
AND RIP OUT ALL OF THE PIPES AND
PUT IN NEW ONES, THAT SAY
MULTIBILLION, TRILLION DOLLAR
TYPE OF PROBLEM.
SO WHERE DO THE CITIES STOP WITH
THEIR RESPONSIBILITY AND WHERE
DOES THE PRIVATE OWNER OF THE
WATER OR THE RECIPIENT OF THE
WATER, WHERE DOES THEIR
RESPONSIBILITY START?
>> THE PROBLEM WITH MOST OF
THESE WATER SYSTEMS IS NOT THE
WATER MAIN ITSELF OR THE WATER
SUPPLY, IT'S THOSE PIPES THAT
LEAD FROM YOUR WATER MAIN TO
YOUR HOUSE OR TO YOUR BUSINESS.
AND THAT IS MOSTLY ON THE
HOMEOWNER OR THE BUSINESS OWN
TORE REPLACE.
A LOT OF CITIES AND COUNTIES ARE
DOING SOME WORK TO TRY TO FUND
SOME OF THIS REPLACEMENT.
THEY'RE OFFERING INTEREST-FREE
LOANS OR GRANTS TO HOMEOWNERS.
THEY'RE DOING SOME OF THE WORK
THEMSELVES.
BUT THIS IS AN EXTREMELY
EXPENSIVE PROBLEM THAT'S GOING
TO TAKE YEARS AND YEARS TO FIX.
>> MEGHAN HOYER OF THE
ASSOCIATED PRESS, THANKS SO MUCH
FOR JOINING US.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: ONE OF THE MOST
CRITICALLY ACCLAIMED TV DRAMA
SERIES IN RECENT YEARS IS "THE
WIRE," WHICH RAN ON HBO FOR FIVE
SEASONS UNTIL 2008.
THE SHOW HAS FOUND A STEADY
STREAM OF NEW VIEWERS IN RECENT
YEARS, AND HAS EVEN MADE IT TO
COLLEGE CLASSROOMS, WHERE IT IS
VIEWED AS MUCH MORE THAN A
HOLLYWOOD PRODUCTION.
FOR THESE COLLEGE STUDENTS,
HOMEWORK INCLUDES WATCHING A TV
SHOW.
>> "THE WIRE" JUST BEGGED FOR
ALL KINDS OF SOCIAL, POLITICAL,
CULTURAL ANALYSIS.
>> WHEN WE WERE WATCHING THE
SHOW TOGETHER, WE BOTH KEPT
THINKING, "THIS WOULD BE GREAT
AS A CLASS."
>> Sreenivasan: SOCIOLOGY
PROFESSOR SHERRIANN
BUTTERFIELD AND LITERATURE AND
GENDER STUDIES PROFESSOR FRAN
BARTKOWSKI ARE CO-TEACHING
THIS 15-WEEK COURSE BASED ON"
THE WIRE" AT RUTGERS
UNIVERSITY IN NEWARK, NEW
JERSEY.
THE CRIME DRAMA SET IN
BALTIMORE, TACKLED A DIFFERENT
ASPECT OF THE CITY'S PROBLEMS
EACH SEASON; FROM HOW GANGS
FUNCTION TO HOW THE POLITICAL
CLASS, AND THE PRESS ENABLE THE
PROBLEMS TO GROW.
>> EVEN THOUGH IT'S A FICTIONAL
SHOW, YOU CAN'T HELP BUT TO NOT
FEEL SAD FOR HOW THESE THINGS
END WHEN YOU REALIZE IF THERE
WAS SOME CHANGE IN THE SYSTEM,
THINGS MIGHT BE DIFFERENT.
>> Sreenivasan: THE FOURTH
SEASON OF "THE WIRE" FOCUSED ON
MIDDLE SCHOOL STUDENTS WHO ARE
RECRUITED TO SELL DRUGS.
>> FIRST WE'RE GONNA GIVE YOU
THE CORNER UP ON PAYSON.
IT USED TO BE BODIE'S OLD
CORNER.
>> SOME SCHOOL SYSTEMS SAY THAT
KIDS DON'T WANT TO COME TO
SCHOOL AND LEARN.
I LIKE HOW THEY LOOK AT THEIR
BACKGROUNDS AND SHOW WHY THEY
COME TO SCHOOL AND ACT THE WAY
THAT THEY DO.
>> Sreenivasan: THIS IS THE
SECOND TIME BUTTERFIELD AND
BARTOWSKI HAVE TAUGHT THIS
CLASS.
BUT IT'S NOT JUST THIS COLLEGE,
NEW YORK UNIVERSITY, JOHNS
HOPKINS, AND HARVARD HAVE USED"
THE WIRE" AS TEACHING MATERIAL.
THE PROFESSORS SHARED THEIR
EXPERIENCES TEACHING "THE WIRE"
AT A CONFERENCE THIS WEEKEND AT
COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY.
ENGLISH LITERATURE PROFESSOR
EILEEN GILLOOLY ORGANIZED IT.
>> IT SHOWS UP IN EVIDENCE
CLASSES IN LAW SCHOOLS.
IT SHOWS UP IN AFRICAN AMERICAN
CLASSES ON MASCULINITY,
SOCIOLOGY CLASSES, ANTHROPOLOGY
CLASSES.
IT'S JUST, YOU NAME IT, IT SHOWS
UP THERE.
>> Sreenivasan: GILLOOLY DREW
COMPARISONS BETWEEN "THE WIRE"
CREATED BY DAVID SIMON AND
19th CENTURY NOVELS.
>> IT REALLY IS LIKE A TEXT.
IT'S SO CAREFULLY PUT TOGETHER.
IT REPAYS REVIEWING, THE WAY
A GOOD TEXT REPLAYS REREADING,
SO EVERY TIME I READ "THE ILIAD"
OR "BLEAK HOUSE" OR "DAVID
COPPERFIELD," OR WHATEVER I SEE
MORE AND MORE.
>> Sreenivasan: YOU'RE PUTTING
DAVID SIMON WITH SOME PRETTY
HIGH COMPANY?
(LAUGHING)
>> WELL, I SUPPOSE IF TV IS
COMING INTO ITS OWN AS GENRE,
HE'D BE ONE OF THOSE PEOPLE
THAT'S MAKING IT COME INTO ITS
OWN.
>> Sreenivasan: THIS SEMESTER
THE RUTGERS CLASS IS USING THE
SHOW'S PORTRAYAL OF RACIAL
INEQUALITY AS A SPRINGBOARD TO
ANALYZE THE "BLACK LIVES MATTER"
MOVEMENT.
>> BLACK LIVES MATTER CAME AS A
MOVEMENT BECAUSE SOME PEOPLE
BELIEVED THEY'D HIT A CEILING,
LIKE, WE ARE DONE WITH THIS.
>> IT'S NOT JUST ABOUT PEOPLE
GETTING SHOT AND KILLED.
IT'S THE INJUSTICE THAT HAPPENS
AFTER THEIR CIVIL RIGHTS HAVE
BEEN VIOLATED.
>> WHETHER YOU AGREE WITH HOW IT
GETS PORTRAYED OR NOT, THAT
LENDS ITSELF TO GREAT LEVELS OF
DEBATE AND ENGAGEMENT.
THE STUDENTS FIND THEMSELVES
CAUGHT BETWEEN, "WELL, I
THOUGHT I KNEW WHAT I WOULD'VE
DONE BEFORE SEEING THIS SHOW,
AND NOW THAT I SEE THE
INTERCONNECTEDNESS OF SYSTEMS,
I'M NOT SURE HOW I WOULD'VE
HANDLED THIS."
>> Sreenivasan: YOU DON'T WALK
AWAY SAYING, "I SEE WHAT THE FIX
IS."
>> RIGHT.
THERE IS NO FIX.
>> Sreenivasan: BARTOWSKI SAYS
IT'S POSSIBLE SHE WILL TEACH"
THE WIRE" AGAIN.
>> I HAVE CERTAINLY ASKED
MYSELF, AND PEOPLE HAVE ASKED
THE QUESTION OF WOULD
YOU, YOU KNOW, ARE THERE OTHER
SHOWS THAT YOU WOULD TEACH?
AND THERE MIGHT BE A COUPLE.
BUT NONE OF THEM ARE QUITE AS
COMPLEX AND RICH, I THINK, AS
THIS IS AND REMAINS.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SUNDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: WALK INTO
CERTAIN GOURMET GROCERS OR HIGH-
END RESTAURANTS, AND YOU MIGHT
FIND TRUFFLES ON THE MENU.
TRUFFLES, A KIND OF FUNGUS, GROW
UNDERGROUND AND ARE DIFFICULT TO
HARVEST, WHICH IS PARTLY WHY
THEY FETCH A HIGH PRICE ON THE
OPEN MARKET.
AND FOR ONE GROUP OF PEOPLE IN
WAR-TORN IRAQ, TRUFFLES ARE A
WAY TO HELP MAKE ENDS MEET.
THE NEWSHOUR'S ZACHARY GREEN HAS
MORE.
>> Reporter: ON A TYPICAL
MORNING ON IRAQ'S MOUNT SINJAR,
MATA MAHMOUD AND HIS COMPANIONS
ARE HARD AT WORK, LOOKING FOR
TRUFFLES.
MAHMOUD AND HIS FRIENDS ARE
ETHNIC YAZIDIS, A RELIGIOUS
MINORITY IN IRAQ WHO HAVE BEEN
PERSECUTED BY ISLAMIC STATE
MILITANTS, WHO OVERRAN THIS
REGION IN 2014.
LIKE MANY IN HIS COMMUNITY,
MAHMOUD WAS DISPLACED FROM HIS
HOME.
>> (translated): MY HOUSE IS
IN THE HANDS OF THE ISLAMIC
STATE.
THEY DIDN'T LEAVE ANYTHING FOR
US.
THEY DESTROYED AND BLEW UP OUR
HOUSES AND NOW THIS IS OUR ONLY
SOURCE OF INCOME.
WE HAVE NO SALARY, AND WE FEED
OUR FAMILIES WITH THIS.
>> Reporter: FINDING AND DIGGING
UP THE TRUFFLES IS DIFFICULT AND
DANGEROUS WORK.
>> (translated): THERE ARE
LOTS OF I.E.D.'S, THE ISLAMIC
STATE HAS PLANTED A LOT.
MY FRIEND WAS BLOWN UP BY ONE
OVER THERE IN THE WEST.
THE ISLAMIC STATE IS ALSO
SHOOTING MORTARS AND THEY LAND
VERY CLOSE BY.
>> Reporter: WITH HIS HARVEST IN
HAND, EVERY MORNING, MAHMOUD AND
OTHER YAZIDIS GO TO THIS LOCAL
VEGETABLE MARKET TO SELL
TRUFFLES TO TRADERS LIKE THIS
MAN, WHO WILL THEN SHIP THEM AS
FAR AS BAGHDAD.
>> (translated): TODAY I HAVE
BOUGHT 700 KILOS SO FAR, AND I
HOPE TO REACH A TON.
AND BY SUNSET I'LL BE DONE.
>> Reporter: ON AN AVERAGE DAY,
MAHMOUD SELLS ABOUT THREE
KILOGRAMS, OR ABOUT 6.5 POUNDS
OF TRUFFLES, EARNING AROUND
10,000 DINARS, OR ROUGHLY EIGHT
U.S. DOLLARS.
DESPITE THE HARDSHIP AND THE
DANGER, MANY YAZIDIS ARE STILL
THANKFUL FOR THE WORK.
>> (translated): IT'S A
BLESSING FROM GOD.
THESE POOR PEOPLE DON'T HAVE A
DINAR IN THEIR POCKET AND WHEN
THEY WORK FROM SUNRISE TO SUNSET
THEY MAKE 50,000, 60,000, EVEN
100,000.
IT'S A GIFT FROM GOD.
>> Sreenivasan: FINALLY JOHN
KERRY WILL BE THE FIRST SITTING
U.S. SECRETARY OF STATE TO
VISIT AND LAY FLOWERS AT THE
PEACE MEMORIAL MUSEUM AT
HIROSHIMA IN JAPAN COMMEMORATING
THE ATOMIC BOMBING THAT HASTENED
THE END OF WORLD WAR II IN THE
PACIFIC, HE IS NOT EXPECTED
TO APOLOGIZE FOR THE TRUMAN'S
DECISION TO USE NUCLEAR
WEAPONS ON AN ENEMY.
KERRY IS IN JAPAN
ATTENDING A TWO-DAY MEETING WITH
THE GROUP OF 7.
ON THE NEWSHOUR TOMORROW.
NICK SCHIFRIN CONTINUES HIS
SERIES INSIDE KENYA WITH A LOOK
AT THE IMPACT OF CORRUPTION ON
LIFE THERE.
THAT'S IT FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
HAVE A GOOD NIGHT.